What is Popular: Different Dimensions of a Simple Word

Introduction
Popular
Adjective
1. Liked or admired by many people or by a particular person or group.
2. attributive (of cultural activities or products) intended for or suited to the taste, understanding, or means of the general public rather than specialists or intellectuals.
3.  (of a belief or attitude) held by the majority of the general public.
4. attributive (of political activity) carried on by the people as a whole rather than restricted to politicians or political parties.
This is the definition given to the word ‘popular’ by the Oxford English Dictionary, perhaps, the most widely accepted lexicon in English-speaking world. While it covers the most common usage of this word, it fails to recognize its historical and cultural significance. These contextual meanings need more attention, especially, in today’s fast changing society. Popular traces its origin to the Latin word ‘popularis’, meaning ‘pertaining to people.’ According to Raymond Williams’ celebrated work ‘Keywords’, it became a part of English language circa 15th century. While, at first, it was used in political and legal contexts, one can see its different meanings emerging in next two centuries. While the original meaning associated with common people and masses continued, it was also associated with ‘low’ and ‘base’. It’s a strange word in the sense that it has very different undertones in different disciplines such as politics, art, culture, music and commercial goods. Sometimes these areas overlap, but the meaning remains variable and flexible. The meaning of any word always depends on context, subjective inclination and perception. These three words become vital when approaching semantic meaning of a word. Perception in particular is a tricky thing to deal with in the field of popular studies. Popular perception and reality are two distinct things, and one doesn’t necessarily lead to other. For instance, there is a popular perception that books are going extinct, less and less people are reading now. But if we look at the sells data or number of new books every year, we find that its completely opposite. Whether people read them or not, they are buying more and more books. In the same way, meaning of a word also changes with user’s class, education and social standing.
In this paper, I want to explore the various aspects of the term ‘popular’. I will start with a brief historical account of this word’s evolution in many literary and political works. Later, I will separately discuss this term with reference to art, culture, ethics, politics, marketing, etc. As the terms such as art, culture and ethics in themselves are hard to define, some of these chapters will be painstakingly complex. The attempt will be to explore everything that connects popular and its many derivatives to realm of society. Defining something like popular and popular culture is a complex task, and when we consider the ever-changing boundaries of popularity in mainstream, its safe to say that my attempt will fall short. But, then, it is extremely difficult to bind everything in a neatly drawn structure. 

Origin and Chronological Journey of Popular
As discussed earlier, the word ‘popular’ traces its roots to Latin. Popularis (pertaining to people) was used by legal authorities to make a particular type of legal suit called “Action Popular.” This legal suit was open to anyone to begin. As 15th century England was a feudal society, most of the legal matters were open only to clergy and nobility. Therefore, action popular being open to lower classes, gave it an alternate implication of being associated with low or base. Similarly, popular estate and popular government while dealing with something that is owned by people as a whole, also had a sense of being ignoble and improper. Even though the modern meaning of well-liked and widely-liked also existed, it had a strong sense of being deliberate. The politics of ‘class’ have always dominated the discourse of how the meaning is created. Nobility associated popularity with a deliberate attempt to try to gain the favor of masses. As literacy and print media were in their cradle stage, they were limited to only few, mostly, upper class man. To this noble class, these masses were uneducated and low-birth creatures without any culture or tact. As a result, anything associated with common people was definitely going to be considered uncultured or low. Therefore, it’s not strange to find that Bacon, in his essay, mocks a man by calling him unquiet and popular (‘a Noble-man of an ancient Family, but unquiet and popular’ (1622)). In 16th and 17th century, people of high birth considered bowing to the wishes of common people for popularity as a bad trait, but this was slowly changing with growing democratic order in this world. Since the French revolution in the late 18th century, high class people have increasingly accepted the power of common people. It was perhaps the first time in human history that common man really mattered.  Also, with the increasing literacy rate, more and more people became aware of their rights and place in the society. Therefore, we find that popular word lost its negative undertones in political circle. Popular was now being seen from the point of view of the people rather than from those seeking favor or power from them. 
While political and legal meaning of popular was changing dramatically, it was not so true for field of art and culture. At first, good art and culture was associated with general acceptance, but as the area of art became open to everyone, so does the fear of diminishing quality and lose morality. Popular art got associated with profanity and pleasing base desires of human beings. One of the earliest examples of rebellion to popular art was closure of English theaters in 1642 by Puritans. Similarly, Jeremy Collier criticized Restoration theater for its sexual innuendo and making mockery of institution of marriage just because it was a popular trend at that time. It’s clear that for several centuries, popular form of art has been associated, not only with being boring or less cultured but also for being immoral and corrupt. How far this accusation is justified is a matter of debate, but at the very least we can see that considering popular art as fleeting or trivial is not a recent phenomenon.
Derivative terms such as popularity, popularize, populist etc. also have changed their meaning through many centuries, for better or worse. For instance, popularize in earlier times meant, to make something easily accessible to everyone, but in recent times, this process is criticized for over-simplification.  

Rise of Popular Culture
To define popular culture, first thing that we need to do is to define culture. In layman’s terms, a culture can be defined as a way of life shared by a group of people. Going in depth, one sees that culture is also a society’s intellectual, spiritual and aesthetic development. Literally, culture means to cultivate; meaning some special values that are shared by all the people of a certain group. Understanding this, it is clear that its very hard to define popular culture. But in general, the set of ubiquitous values and practices shared by most of the members of a society is called their popular culture. But unlike folk culture or tribal culture, it’s hard to pinpoint the people who makes up popular group. To define this, we may have to go for the easiest sense of the word popular – well liked or widely liked. So popular culture would be something that is liked by a lot of people. As culture means a shared way of life it obviously comprises songs, stories, art, literature, food, religion. So, what makes up the popular culture is the general liking to all these things, individually. The last term is very important in this definition, for its fairly certain that no two people will agree on all these things, but we are not looking for that in the popular culture. What popular culture means is that all the songs that are widely liked, all the books that are widely read, all the dishes that are frequently ate, are part of the popular culture. 
Popular culture as we see today came to the fore in the early decades of 20th century. It was a period of massive change in all spheres of life.  Most of the nations became truly democratic, that means universal suffrage. Many social groups such as women, minorities and young people without property had the right to vote for the first time. But the second world war stopped the spread of popular culture for some time. In the aftermath of World War II, the United States emerged as the world's leading industrial power. Through government support for education and home loans coupled with a booming economy meant that Americans in the postwar era had more disposable income than ever before. In the 1950s and 1960s, the generation of children born after World War II, known collectively as the baby boomers, grew into teenagers and young adults. As the largest single generation up until that point in American history, they had a tremendous effect on popular culture. The rapid capitalization after WW2 played a vital role in this process. Perhaps this economic freedom, more than anything, gave rise to the movement that we now call popular culture. Undoubtedly, Mass media also played a significant role in this cultural shift. 
As we are living in a more and more globalized world, the popular culture is also becoming a diverse and multi-cultural idea. For instance, American rock music can be heard all through this world; similarly, Indian food items such as naan and Chicken Tikka are also becoming a part of western popular culture. But again, we can not ignore the power politics in this cultural sharing. What Edward Said calls neo-colonialism in his book Orientalism is a point worth discussing. We have to discuss terms such as cultural hegemony while discussing global popular culture.
Now that we have defined popular culture in general terms, its time to look at some particular examples of popular culture that not only gives us a broader understanding of this phenomenon, but also help us understand the small nuances of what makes the popular culture. Here I will discuss the popular culture of early 1960s. I’ve dedicated a whole chapter to the counter culture of late 1960s, but to understand that first we need to understand the regular popular culture. Popular culture of any period is always affected by the political, historical, economic and social background of that period. I’m only talking about American popular culture because it’s much more varied and richer at this particular time. So, what constituted 60s popular culture. Although its much more complex, we can summarize all the important political events of that period in three phrases. Fear of Communists, Vietnam War and Civil Rights Movement. Economically and technologically, it was one of the best periods in the history of the US. Radio and televisions became household items, and helped by the advertisement consumer habits began to change. Aided by the easily available sexual contraception, young generation was experiencing more and more sexual freedom.  Everything seemed possible, man has just conquered the last frontier(space). These were the pillars on which popular culture of early 1960s stood upon. 
If these were the reasons for this cultural revolution, what really become apparent was the change in attitude. The individual aspects of this cultural change contributed to wholesome changes in life style choices. In music industry, artists became performers. Televisions gave them a chance to get noticed, and for that they have to change their persona, become larger than life figure. Elvis Presley, the Beatlemania, and the Ed Sullivan show became a phenomenon. Rock & Roll replaced jazz and blues as the dominant genre. These changes were so fast that no one had a chance to adapt. For instance, when the Beatles came to the US for the first time, there was a feeling of euphoria in the air. Girls fought their parents out in the street to go for a music concert. These acts forever changed the music industry, now, it was live performance driven instead of ‘record’ sells. Clothes became shorter for women, and hairs grew long for boys. And although we are still away from the counter-culture, yet we can see the early change of tide. In art & literature, there were not many changes. The reason being, art & literature after WW2 was already very much changed. The Beat poets and postmodern novels such as Catch-22 were very popular. Pulp magazines such as Playboy and Victoria’s Secrets also saw rise in their sales. Marlboro man and Lucky Strike ads to .99 concepts of advertising also emerged in this period. Food choices were becoming increasingly global. Health and diet, for the first time, became a mass concern. Diet pills and recreational drug became the order of the day. One other thing that has a significant impact in coming decades was rise of feminism. Rising higher education and sexual freedom gave women a sense of self, to see themselves apart from a man. Concepts such as working-women and single mother developed rapidly with a great force. 
I haven’t touched upon the folk culture and civil rights movement because they had little to do with popular culture at first, but by the 1965 these two distinct cultures started to affect each other. Standing up for the rights of African-Americans and against the Vietnam war became a kind of popular obsession.

Counter culture of late 1960s
If anything, lasting, two world wars gave us was the idea of individualism. Advent of postmodernism and widespread destruction in first half of 20th century gave rise to a general sense of dissatisfaction. Dissatisfaction with all the established ideas of society. Be it religion or morality or patriotism, everything was questioned. Ideas such as nihilism and hedonism took over people’s imagination. Proposition that man is a social being was challenged for once and all. For the first time in history of mankind, common people wanted nothing more than personal satisfaction and happiness. They started to believe that it’s the society and social values adhered by upper classes that leads to their plight. The effects were widespread and clearly visible. Counter culture that spread throughout the US and Europe in 2nd half of 20th century is a result of this disenchantment from established values. Rock & Roll music from the first half of 60s paved the way for the emergence of counter culture.  In Rock music young generation had found an outlet for their feelings and concerns, however, their parents were much less enthused about rock and roll and the rebellion and sexuality it seemed to promote. Many regarded the music as a threat to American values. For instance, when Elvis Presley appeared on The Ed Sullivan Show, a popular television variety program, the camera deliberately focused on his torso and did not show his twisting hips or legs shaking in time to the music. Despite older generations dislike of the genre, or perhaps because of it, more than 68 percent of the music played on the radio in 1956 was rock and roll. In this way, although groundbreaking, it would be wrong to say that this was a sudden process. There were many things that foreshadowed this arrival of counter culture. So, what is counter culture? In a way, counter culture always exists, whatever society we live in. There would always be people dissatisfied with the state of affairs. But what sets 1960s counter culture is its sheer acceptance. One may say that it was as popular as the widely accepted popular culture. And more than that it has changed our world for once and all. Because some people in 60s decided to shun the social expectations, the meaning of right and wrong have changed. The Beat poets such as Kerouac and Ginsberg have already shown people an alternate way of living life. Though their life was full of struggle and ridicule, they showed a whole generation how to live without society. Another big reason for counter culture was easy availability of narcotics and young generation’s disenchantment with established patriarchy, patriotism and social order. Student moment of may 68 in Paris proved that new generation wasn’t going to accept everything given to them by their parents and teachers. There was a widespread belief in counter culture that, war, any kind of war, was bad. Songs such as Give Peace a Chance, Imagine, Times They are a Changin’ are kind of voice of this dissenting generation. Alcohol, marijuana and narcotic abuse was a big part of this culture. So is the promiscuous and casual sex. Events such as ‘Woodstock’ and ‘Peace in Bed’ intrigued a whole generation. The most important thing with American counter culture was that in every aspect it was more vibrant and varied than its sibling. In a way, counter culture was a sexually charged culture that emerged to challenge America’s Puritan legacy.


Ethical Aspect of Popular Culture
At the very basic level ethics is a system of moral principles. This is how people decide how to make decisions of right and wrong, and live their life. Ethics decide what is good for an individual and society as a whole. This is where it interacts with the culture. Culture is also a way of living life. But when two different cultures progress simultaneously, questions of morality and ethics always become relevant. We have to understand that humans are always divided in group, so there is always more than one culture at work at any particular time. For instance, High culture – Low culture, Folk Culture – Contemporary Culture, Urban Culture – Rural Culture, Western Culture – Indian Culture, Christian Culture – Islamic Culture. And in every culture, there are purist who are afraid of losing their identity and values in face of the increasing influence of other culture. One other reason is that as human beings we are always either intrigued or afraid of something new. So, in most cases, there is always a struggle between new and old, or in better terms traditional and modern. We observe this struggle everyday in our day to day life. 
As popular culture and things are market driven, they are often blamed for the moral decay of society. What is immoral for one society or person may be perfectly fine for others, or at some time not having that may be a digression on their personal freedom. But even in the most free and progressive societies, popular culture is considered an immoral aspect of life. Counter culture is often seen with disgust because for most traditional people it represents profanity and alcohol. Even the popular songs and movies are considered low quality and with lose morals. And this disgust for popular things is so deeply rooted in some culture that it takes a very violent nature. In most Islamic countries, popular or western culture is seen with distrust, and is often first thing to be suppressed by violence. For instance, Boko Haram, an Islamic terror outfit in Nigeria, gained its following by protesting against western culture. Even in India, right wing groups such as VHP, Shiv Sena, and Bajrang Dal opposes western cultural ideas like Valentine’s Day, Chocolates, dressing choices and now even freedom given to girls. More often than not, it’s a frustrated attempt by majoritarian religious groups to influence politics, but it tells us how popular culture is often considered immoral. 


Popular Culture and Mass Market
Popular culture has been associated with mass media and consumerism from the very start. Something that is popular sells well. A lot of people believe that popular culture, for commercial purposes, try to objectify everything. Although, critics have a tendency to overamplify this fact, there is no denying that there is some truth to this. Popular culture does objectify people. For commercial purposes, it put people in certain boxes, or stereotype them. If you look at any popular movie, song or advertisement, you’ll find that the definition of a beautiful woman is someone extremely slim and fair. These values are repeated so often that everyone now see themselves in these terms. Everyone is after getting fairer and fitter, no matter the method. Low self esteem or body image problems generated by this popular image of beauty has affected our society very badly. Popular culture or more appropriately popular media also tends to stereotype things. If you read magazines, watch movies and listen to songs, you would observe hundreds of stereotypes. Black man as violent, Asians only good at mathematics and computers, white girls being promiscuous. Not only that, popular media also coerces us to be like others. This adherence to mass mentality, at the expense of uniqueness and singularity is something that popular culture was expected to remove, for it was generated by people themselves. But as they say give any ‘new’ thing time to standardize, it will become like old. 
At this juncture we have a more pertinent question, who and what makes the popular culture now? Its very important to discuss how popular culture, trends, and fads are transferred downwards? And even more importantly, for us as a student of humanities, how much of the popular culture is deliberately built, for mass consumption? While discussing the historical journey of word popular, it became apparent that popular was also associated with deliberately gaining favor of masses for your own good. Perhaps, this is what happening in popular culture, at present. Media houses, artists and large companies are controlling the public discourse, and as a result of that telling us what to do, what to read, what to eat, who to love, what to wear, what to listen. Instead of individuals, we have become a group that they try to please. Now there are movies, songs, literature for specific groups, and if you belong to any of these groups, you are expected to do certain things. Young adults, adults, Women over 25, singles under 40, these are all groups made by media and commercial market to codify people. If you look closely, all of us are changing our lifestyles copying these trends. One of the biggest trend or fads that is circulating in popular culture is about health. Now, for better health, you better drink almond milk instead of animal milk, be a vegan, apple cider vinegar is good for your skin, or you should walk at a certain speed at certain time to get health benefits. Who among us has not heard these things? At first glance it looks good that people are being more careful about their health, we should thank popular culture for that. But things are often not as they seem, according to market analysis, health product industry is going to be worth 30 billion dollars in India alone. Now looking at this staggering number it becomes clear that this trend is brought in popular culture for commercial gains. How can the milk that the world is drinking for thousands of years become unhealthy in 2 years? So, its no surprise that popular culture today is also a marketing strategy for industrialists. But even knowing this you cannot escape the popular culture. Even if a person doesn’t have these popular expectations from himself, other peoples do, and being a social entity its hard to escape this.  


Populism: A Present Danger
Populism, unlike other form of political processes such as fascism and socialism, is a hard ideology to define. Populism means a political party or leader trying to woo the common people. It is often accompanied with some other ideology like nationalism or socialism. Populism may not seem dangerous by definition, but is considered a very dangerous phenomenon that has spread throughout the world in 21st century. It has a become a part of global popular culture. From Donald Trump in the USA to Erdogan in Turkey, and even Narendra Modi in India are part of this change. Most of these populist movements are driven by the right-wing rhetoric. Populists are so popular because they project themselves as the savior of common people. They make masses think that they people have been cheated by rich elites. That only they care about their problem. In reality, populism is just a way to gain and retain power for these leaders. They feel that people are affected by unemployment, immigration, religious insecurity – and make it seem that these people matter to them. Some underlining themes of populism are distrust of authority, hatred for rich and haves, complete rejection of intellectuals, and most importantly violent reaction to any form of criticism. Populism show us a dangerous side of popularity and popular politics.

Popularity in Age of social media
There aren’t many aspects of the human life that haven’t been affected by the explosion of social media over the past decade. From the way we interact with our friends to the way we find our partners; every process has changed completely. Popularity and popular culture are also deeply affected by this new world created by social media.  Popularity, used to have an unquantifiable quality to it. On social media, however, it’s the opposite: easily measured in followers, likes, retweets, etc. This is part of the reason why popularity on social media doesn’t usually translate to popularity into the real world. Certainly, some people may be popular on social media precisely because they’re popular in real world or have a huge media presence elsewhere, like, Selena Gomez or Lionel Messi, but digital popularity is so distinct from its real counterpart that it rarely carries over. Not only that, but our social media profiles are generally false personas; projections of the people that we would like to be rather than reflections of who we really are.
